Routing features (loc changes, NavigationLock) (#26919)
dotnet/AspNetCore.Docs: aspnetcore/blazor/fundamentals/routing.md

> [!NOTE]
> Not throwing if the cancellation token in <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Components.Routing.NavigationContext> is canceled can result in unintended behavior, such as rendering a component from a previous navigation.

## Handle location changes in a component

`RegisterLocationChangingHandler` registers a handler to process incoming navigation events. The handler's context provided by `LocationChangingContext` includes the following properties:

* `TargetLocation`: Gets the target location.
* `HistoryEntryState`: Gets the state associated with the target history entry.
* `IsNavigationIntercepted`: Gets whether the navigation was intercepted from a link.
* `CancellationToken`: Gets a <xref:System.Threading.CancellationToken> to determine if the navigation was canceled, for example, to determine if the user triggered a different navigation.
* `PreventNavigation`: Called to prevent the navigation from continuing.

> A component can register multiple location changing handlers, and calling <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Components.NavigationManager.NavigateTo%2A> invokes all of the registered handlers. Registered handlers are automatically disposed by the Navigation Manager when the component is disposed.

Reviewer: > Registered handlers are automatically disposed by the Navigation Manager when the component is disposed.

This is only true when using the `<NavigationLock />` component. If a handler is created using `NavigationManager.RegisterLocationChangingHandler()`, then the handler must be manually disposed, e.g.:
```csharp
var registration = NavigationManager.RegisterLocationChangingHandler(OnLocationChanging);
// ...
registration.Dispose();
```

> A component can register multiple location changing handlers, and calling <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Components.NavigationManager.NavigateTo%2A> invokes all of the registered handlers. Registered handlers are automatically disposed by the Navigation Manager when the component is disposed.

Reviewer: > A component can register multiple location changing handlers, and calling `Microsoft.AspNetCore.Components.NavigationManager.NavigateTo` invokes all of the registered handlers.

While this is true, navigations will invoke _all_ location changing handlers registered across the entire app (i.e. handlers can be registered across multiple components, and any internal navigation will execute them all in parallel). Also, in addition to `NavigateTo()` invoking the handlers, clicking on internal links (those that point to URLs under the base href) and navigating using the forward/back buttons will also invoke the handlers.

It's also probably worth pointing out that these handlers will only get run for internal navigations within the app. If you click on a link that takes you to a different site (or change the address bar to a different site manually, etc.), then location changing handlers will not be executed. However, the `<NavigationLock />` component does have a `ConfirmExternalNavigation` parameter that catches these cases and displays the built-in browser "Are you sure you want to leave this page?" dialog.

> [!NOTE]
> Not throwing if the cancellation token in <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Components.Routing.NavigationContext> is canceled can result in unintended behavior, such as rendering a component from a previous navigation.

> ## Handle location changes in a component

Reviewer: Should we call this section something like "Handle/prevent location changes"? I ask because the ability to prevent navigation events was the biggest motivator for this feature.

Author: "Handle" just means "handle" in an arbitrary way. However, making a popular feature stand out is a good idea.

🤔 ...

*Handle (prevent) location changes*

Does that work?

> `RegisterLocationChangingHandler` registers a handler to process incoming navigation events. The handler's context provided by `LocationChangingContext` includes the following properties:

Reviewer: Do we need to use an `<xref:>` for `RegisterLocationChangingHandler` and `LocationChangingContext`?

Author: We do, but they won't be available for cross-linking until GA lands. I circle around and add them later.

* `TargetLocation`: Gets the target location.
* `HistoryEntryState`: Gets the state associated with the target history entry.
* `IsNavigationIntercepted`: Gets whether the navigation was intercepted from a link.
* `CancellationToken`: Gets a <xref:System.Threading.CancellationToken> to determine if the navigation was canceled, for example, to determine if the user triggered a different navigation.
* `PreventNavigation`: Called to prevent the navigation from continuing.

> A component can register multiple location changing handlers, and calling <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Components.NavigationManager.NavigateTo%2A> invokes all of the registered handlers. [Dispose registered handlers](xref:blazor/components/lifecycle#component-disposal-with-idisposable-and-iasyncdisposable) to avoid memory leaks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A component can register multiple location changing handlers, and calling <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Components.NavigationManager.NavigateTo%2A> invokes all of the registered handlers. [Dispose registered handlers](xref:blazor/components/lifecycle#component-disposal-with-idisposable-and-iasyncdisposable) to unregister them.
```

While it would also be a memory leak to not call `Dispose()`, the primary purpose of doing so is to unregister a handler.

* If any location changing handlers are registered, all navigations are initially reverted, then replayed if the navigation isn't canceled.
* If overlapping navigation requests are made, the latest request always cancels earlier requests, which means the following:
  * The app may treat multiple back and forward button selections as a single selection.
  * If the user selects multiple links before the navigation completes, the last link selected determines the navigation.

For more information on passing `NavigationOptions` to <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Components.NavigationManager.NavigateTo%2A> to control entries and state of the navigation history stack, see the [Navigation options](#navigation-options) section.

For additional example code, see the [`NavigationManagerComponent` in the `BasicTestApp` (`dotnet/aspnetcore` reference source)](https://github.com/dotnet/aspnetcore/blob/main/src/Components/test/testassets/BasicTestApp/RouterTest/NavigationManagerComponent.razor).

[!INCLUDE[](~/includes/aspnetcore-repo-ref-source-links.md)]

> To facilitate the control of navigation events in a Razor component, use the `NavigationLock` component. After the `NavigationLock` component is rendered, it intercepts navigation events. Handlers associated with `NavigationLock` components are disposed automatically when the component is disposed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To facilitate the control of navigation events in a Razor component, use the `NavigationLock` component. As long as the `NavigationLock` component is rendered, it intercepts navigation events. Handlers associated with `NavigationLock` components are disposed automatically when the component is disposed.
```

> [!NOTE]
> Not throwing if the cancellation token in <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Components.Routing.NavigationContext> is canceled can result in unintended behavior, such as rendering a component from a previous navigation.

## Handle location changes in a component

`RegisterLocationChangingHandler` registers a handler to process incoming navigation events. The handler's context provided by `LocationChangingContext` includes the following properties:

* `TargetLocation`: Gets the target location.
* `HistoryEntryState`: Gets the state associated with the target history entry.
* `IsNavigationIntercepted`: Gets whether the navigation was intercepted from a link.
* `CancellationToken`: Gets a <xref:System.Threading.CancellationToken> to determine if the navigation was canceled, for example, to determine if the user triggered a different navigation.
* `PreventNavigation`: Called to prevent the navigation from continuing.

> A component can register multiple location changing handlers. Navigations invoke all of the location changing handlers registered across the entire app (across multiple components), and any internal navigation executes them all in parallel. In addition to <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Components.NavigationManager.NavigateTo%2A> invoking the handlers, selecting internal links (those that point to URLs under the app's base path) and navigating using the forward/back buttons also invoke the handlers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A component can register multiple location changing handlers. Navigations invoke all of the location changing handlers registered across the entire app (across multiple components), and any internal navigation executes them all in parallel. In addition to <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Components.NavigationManager.NavigateTo%2A> invoking the handlers, selecting internal links (those that point to URLs under the app's base path) and navigating using the forward/back buttons also invokes the handlers.
```

Author: Plural verb for compound subject joined by 'and' ... *selecting internal links* **_AND_** navigating ... invoke.

However, I think this is a bit long for us (i.e., to control loc of the content). I think I'll use a list and break this up.

* When navigating using the forward and back buttons in a browser.

Handlers are only executed for internal navigations within the app. If the user selects a link that navigates to a different site or changes the address bar to a different site manually, location changing handlers aren't executed.

[Dispose registered handlers](xref:blazor/components/lifecycle#component-disposal-with-idisposable-and-iasyncdisposable) to unregister them.

In the following example, a location changing handler is registered for navigation events. Note that the component implements `IDisposable` and disposes the handler in its `Dispose` method.

`Pages/NavHandler.razor`:

```razor
@page "/nav-handler"
@inject NavigationManager NavigationManager
@implements IDisposable

<p>
    <button @onclick="NavigationManager.NavigateTo("/")">
        Home (Allowed)
    </button>
    <button @onclick="NavigationManager.NavigateTo("/counter")">
        Counter (Prevented)
    </button>
</p>

@code {
    private IDisposable? registration;

    protected override void OnInitialized()
    {
        registration = 
            NavigationManager.RegisterLocationChangingHandler(OnLocationChanging);

>     }

Reviewer: This should actually be `OnAfterRenderAsync()` instead, since `RegisterLocationChangingHandler()` may perform JS interop. This is required for Blazor Server prerendering to work, since JS interop calls will throw during prerendering (and `OnAfterRenderAsync()` does not run during prerendering).
